initial draft of identity guidance (#29935)
dotnet/AspNetCore.Docs: aspnetcore/security/how-to-choose-identity-solution.md

* A solution that allows you to install and run the service on your own machines.
* Run the authentication service locally as a container.

## Decide where user data such as sign-ins are stored

Another important factor to consider is where the user sign-in data is stored. Many developers choose external, cloud-based services like Microsoft Entra ID to manage identity. A cloud-based service provider:

* Takes on the responsibilities of securely storing data.
* keeps the software up to date with the latest security patches and releases.
* Complies with privacy regulations.

Others prefer to store data on their own servers due to regulations, compliance, policy, or other reasons.

If the data is stored on your servers, you'll most likely need to choose an installable or container-based solution.

> ## Pros and cons
> 
> The decision process is diagrammed here for fast reference:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Identity vs token server

Use the following diagram to help you decide whether to use the ASP.NET Core Identity system or a token server for authentication and authorization:
```
@tdykstra  please review suggestion

Reviewer 2: Looks good

* Authenticator apps

For most scenarios, this may be the only provider needed.

To learn more:

* Read the [Introduction to Identity on ASP.NET Core](xref:security/authentication/identity)
* Follow a tutorial to build your own secure .NET web app: [Secure a .NET web app with the ASP.NET Core Identity framework](/training/modules/secure-aspnet-core-identity/).

In other scenarios, a server or service that manages authentication and identity may be beneficial.

## Determine if an OIDC server is needed

Web apps require a way to *remember* past actions because the web, by default, is stateless. Otherwise, users would be forced to enter their credentials every time they navigated to a new page. The common solution for remembering state is *cookies*, a browser-based mechanism for storing data. The web server sends the initial cookie, then the browser stores it and sends it back with each request. This is done automatically without the need for the developer to write any code. Cookies are easy to use and built into the browser but are designed for use within a single website or web domain. The default solution that is built into ASP.NET Core uses cookie-based authentication.

> Tokens are containers with metadata that are explicitly passed through the headers or body of HTTP requests. The main advantage of tokens over cookies is that they are not tied to a specific app or domain. Instead, tokens are usually *signed* with asymmetric cryptography. For example, OIDC servers issue tokens with information about identity using the [JavaScript Web Token (JWT)](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/JSON_Web_Token) format which includes signing. Asymmetric cryptography uses a combination of a private key known only to the signer, and a public key which everyone can know. Tokens may also be encrypted. 

Reviewer 3: JSON web token not JavaScript

* Products you install on your server, called *self-host*.
* Containers run in a host like Docker.
* Web-based services you integrate with to manage identity.

Some solutions are free and open source, while others are commercially licensed. See [identity management solutions](xref:security/identity-management-solutions) for a list of available options. It is possible that your organization already uses an existing identity provider. In that case, it may make sense to use the existing provider instead of going with a different solution. All of the major solutions provide documentation for configuring ASP.NET Core to use their product or service.

## Disconnected scenarios

Many solutions, such as [Microsoft Entra ID](/azure/active-directory/fundamentals/active-directory-whatis), are cloud-based and require an Internet connection to work. If your environment doesn't allow Internet connectivity, you won't be able to use the service. 

> ASP.NET Core Identity works perfectly well in disconnected scenarios. If you require a full OIDC server and support scenarios where either your app cannot access the Internet or must still function on the local network even if the Internet is disconnected, choose one of the following options:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
ASP.NET Core Identity works perfectly well in disconnected scenarios, such as:

* The app can't access the Internet.
* The app must still function on the local network even if the Internet is disconnected.

If you require a full OIDC server for a disconnected scenario, choose one of the following options:
```

![Identity management decision flow](./_static/identity-management-decision-flow.png)

The following table lists some of the things to consider when choosing your identity management solution.

|**Feature**  |**Self-host (infrastructure or container)**  |**Cloud** |
|--------------|--------------------------------|------------|
|**App integration**|Local solutions that are implemented as libraries or frameworks can often be integrated directly in your own app. Container-based solutions require a hand-off to occur between your web app and the container-based service.|Cloud-based solutions typically integrate at specific points in your sign-in flow and provide configuration to update the UI to match your theme, but the level of customization available is limited.|
|**Configuration**|Self host solutions require configuring the software for the environment in addition to setting up how you want to manage identities. Container-based solutions typically provide a web-based UI for configuration.|Cloud-based solutions typically provide a web-based UI for configuration.|

> |**Customization**|Self-host solutions are usually highly customizable, including code-based changes. Although containerized solutions provide extensibility options, they are often more limited.|Cloud-based services allow customization but it is typically limited to configuration-based changes.|

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
|**Customization**|Self-host solutions are usually highly customizable, including code-based changes. Although containerized solutions provide extensibility options, they are often more limited.|Cloud-based services allow customization, but it's typically limited to configuration-based changes.|
```

|**Maintenance**|Installed products require a dedicated resource to ensure all security patches are applied in a timely fashion and to manage upgrades. The upgrade and patch process for containers is usually lower-friction and involves simply installing the provided container image.|The service provider maintains their cloud-based solution, including applying needed patches and handling upgrades.|

> |**User credentials storage**|You are responsible for data governance and handling breaches.|The risks and regulations associated with handling user credentials are delegated to the service provider.|

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
|**User credentials storage**|You are responsible for data governance and handling breaches.|Managing the risks associated with handling user credentials, and complying with regulations. is delegated to the service provider.|
```

* [Two-factor authentication (2FA)](xref:security/authentication/2fa)
* [Password management](xref:security/authentication/accconfirm)
* Account lockout and reactivation
* Authenticator apps

For most scenarios, this may be the only provider needed. Using the built-in identity solution does come with trade-offs. For example, if you decide to switch to a different service later, you will need to migrate your existing data to the new system and update your code to use the new system's provider. Choosing a token service can provide a standards-based approach (with OAuth 2.0 and OIDC) that may minimize the overhead of migration if you ever need to change to a different service that is also OIDC compliant.

To learn more:

* Read the [Introduction to Identity on ASP.NET Core](xref:security/authentication/identity)
* Follow a tutorial to build your own secure .NET web app: [Secure a .NET web app with the ASP.NET Core Identity framework](/training/modules/secure-aspnet-core-identity/).

In other scenarios, a server or service that manages authentication and identity may be beneficial.

## Determine if a token server is needed

> Web apps require a way to *remember* past actions because the web, by default, is stateless. Otherwise, users would be forced to enter their credentials every time they navigated to a new page. The common solution for remembering state is *cookies*, a browser-based mechanism for storing data. The web server sends the initial cookie, then the browser stores it and sends it back with each request. This is done automatically without the need for the developer to write any code. Cookies are easy to use and built into the browser but are designed for use within a single website or web domain. The default solution that is built into ASP.NET Core uses cookie-based authentication.

Author: I'll update the document to clarify this.

For the authentication, the OAuth 2.0 specifification defines two types of clients.

* **Confidential clients**, like server-rendered web apps, are able to keep secrets. The secret is stored on the server and therefore is never shared with the user.

> * Most other clients, including mobile and desktop, are **public clients** that are not suitable for storing secrets because they can be accessed on the user. Simply encrypting the data is not considered strong enough protection. These clients require a different authentication flow that uses tokens.

Author: Great point. I had some feedback about clarifying these concepts but probably not the right audience or document to do it.

> Tokens are containers with metadata that are explicitly passed through the headers or body of HTTP requests. The main advantage of tokens over cookies is that they are not tied to a specific app or domain. Instead, tokens are usually *signed* with asymmetric cryptography. Asymmetric cryptography uses a combination of a private key known only to the signer, and a public key which everyone can know.

Author: > > Instead, tokens are usually _signed_ with asymmetric cryptography.
> 
> This is how JWS tokens work, but not JWE tokens. And the opaque tokens issued by the `BearerTokenHandler` are encrypted just like cookies.

@halter73 Do you have any thoughts or examples regarding a minimum definition and way to describe tokens without overcomplicating things?

The token can't be tampered with due to the private key. The public key:

* Makes it possible to validate the token to ensure it hasn't been changed.
* Guarantees that it was generated by the entity holding the private key.

The main disadvantage to using tokens is that they require a token server to both issue and provide validation for tokens. The token server must be installed, configured, and maintained.

A common reason a token server is required is for applications that exposes web-based APIs that are consumed by other apps. For exposed web-based APIs, client UIs such as Single Page Applications (SPA), mobile clients, and desktop clients are considered to be part of the same app. SPA examples include Angular, React, and Blazor WebAssembly. If apps other than your web app or any client UIs must make a secure API call to your app, you'll likely want to use tokens. If you only have client UIs, ASP.NET Core Identity provides the option to acquire a token during authentication. The authentication token:

* Can be used by mobile and desktop clients.

> * Isn't suitable for managing access from external apps.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
* Isn't suitable for managing access from third-party apps.
```

People might assume "external" includes first-party mobile and desktop clients.

Another reason a token server is required is for sharing sign-ins with other apps. Commonly referred to as *single sign on*, this feature enables users to:

* Sign in once with a web app's form.
* Use the resulting credentials to authenticate with other apps without having to sign-in again or choose a different password.

A token server is typically preferred to provide a secure and scalable solution for single sign on. 

> For apps that don't expose web-based APIs that are consumed by other apps and don't share logins with other apps, the simplest way to quickly secure an app is to use the built-in ASP.NET Core Identity provider. Otherwise, a token server provided by a third-party identity management solution is needed. Token servers are available as:

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
For apps that don't share logins with other apps, the simplest way to quickly secure an app is to use the built-in ASP.NET Core Identity provider. Otherwise, a token server provided by a third-party identity management solution is needed. Token servers are available as:
```

Multiple apps should work fine with `MapIdentityApi` as long as they're all accessing the same thing.

* Containers run in a host like Docker.
* Web-based services you integrate with to manage identity.

Some solutions are free and open source, while others are commercially licensed. See [identity management solutions](xref:security/identity-management-solutions) for a list of available options. It is possible that your organization already uses an existing identity provider. In that case, it may make sense to use the existing provider instead of going with a different solution. All of the major solutions provide documentation for configuring ASP.NET Core to use their product or service.

## Disconnected scenarios

Many solutions, such as [Microsoft Entra ID](/azure/active-directory/fundamentals/active-directory-whatis), are cloud-based and require an Internet connection to work. If your environment doesn't allow Internet connectivity, you won't be able to use the service. If you must support scenarios where either your app cannot access the Internet or must still function on the local network even if the Internet is disconnected, choose one of the following options:

* A solution that allows you to install and run the service on your own machines.

> * Run the authentication service locally as a container.

Reviewer 4: Shouldn't we be recommending Identity for "disconnected" scenarios as well?

Author: > Shouldn't we be recommending Identity for "disconnected" scenarios as well?

Yes. I'll update the first bullet to make this more clear.

## Decide where user data such as sign-ins are stored

Another important factor to consider is where the user sign-in data is stored. Many developers choose external, cloud-based services like Microsoft Entra ID to manage identity. A cloud-based service provider:

* Takes on the responsibilities of securely storing data.
* keeps the software up to date with the latest security patches and releases.
* Complies with privacy regulations.

Others prefer to store data on their own servers due to regulations, compliance, policy, or other reasons.

If the data is stored on your servers, you'll most likely need to choose an installable or container-based solution.

> ## Identity vs token server

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
## Identity vs OIDC server
```

I think "token server" is confusing now that Identity can issue tokens itself.

Use the following diagram to help you decide whether to use the ASP.NET Core Identity system or a token server for authentication and authorization:

![Identity management decision flow](./_static/identity-management-decision-flow.png)

The following table lists some of the things to consider when choosing your identity management solution.

> |**Feature**  |**Self-host**  |**Container**  |**Cloud** |

Reviewer 4: Is "self-host" exclusively Duende? Everything else would run out of process, right? That would make everything else effectively equivalent to the "Container" column for the purposes of this table.

We should clarify this.
